In Python, a sub-directory that includes a __init__.py file is considered a package, and can be imported. When you import a package, the __init__.py module executes and 
defines what symbols the package exposes to the outside world.
Hence, flasky is the package in this project.
A variable contains a value.
The __name__ variable passed to the Flask class is a Python predefined variable, which is set to the name of the module in which it is used. 
Flask uses the location of the module passed here as a starting point when it needs to load associated resources such as template files.

The bottom import is a workaround to circular imports, a common problem with Flask applications.

Network servers listen for connections on a specific port number. Applications deployed on production web servers typically listen on port 443, or sometimes 80 if 
they do not implement encryption, but access to these ports require administration rights.
The operation that converts a template into a complete HTML page is called rendering.
A decorator enhances functions with additional behaviours. It is written above a function and starts with the @ sign.
the app route decorator from flask creates a mapping between a url and a function.

Web browsers receive the URL(consisting of an IP address and a port number) typed in the address bar and sends a request to the IP address (of a server) and the 
server checks for the path, returns the response of the function defined for that url to the client(browser).
Web servers run on an IP address and a PORT number.
localhost (127.0.0.1) - ip address of every machine -- flask server ip address.
5000 - flask server port number.

By default, flask will look for templates in a directory called TEMPLATES.

In Jinja, we can use the dot syntax to access components even though it's a dictionary.
<div> is just a container for other html elements.

flask extensions are regular python packages that can be installed with pip - package manager.

As a general rule, any fields that have validators attached will have error messages added under form.<field_name>.errors.

Configuration can be done in a number of ways in flask. One is using app.config.
Make sure DEBUG is set to False in production. Leaving it on will allow users to run arbitrary Python code on your server.

action attribute in the form element is used to identify what URL the browser should use when submitting the information in the form.
By entering an empty string, the action attribute uses the current url in the address bar. That is why when we submit, it executes the same function since it is still 
the same URL but it now encounters the if form.validate_on_submit construct.

Relational databases are very good for storing structured data.

Flask sqlalchemy: sqlite; which requires no server, it is based on a file on disk.
		  mysql and postgresql

__file__ :: returns the path to the containing file including the name of the file, os.path.dirname can be used to remove the name of the file from the path
SQLALCHEMY_TRACK_MODIFICATIONS : SQLALCHEMY uses it to determine if to signal the application every time a change is about to be made in the database.

routes (errors) and models are prone to potential circular dependencies and that's why they are being imported at the bottom of the __init__.py module.

In relational databases, the primary key is a unique identifier for each element stored in a table.

__repr__ :: used by python to print the class to the console.

Relational databases can do efficient searches only when the attributes/columns you search on are indexed. Hence, index parameter is only related with performance. 
index also helps in sorting

flask db init :: creates a new migrations directory that contains python scripts to implement the database schema
flask db migrate :: creates a migration script
fkask db ugrade :: calls the upgrade function in the migrations script and applies the changes to the database

migrations help to preserve the data in the database.

the backref adds a virtual attribute to the other table that does not actually exist in the database but exists in the view that sqlalchemy provides of it.

flask shell is used to start a python session from flask and has the benefit that it has the application instance imported by default with other instances possible too.

@app_shell_context_processor :: attaches to a function that provides symbols that we want pre-imported to our python session started from flask.

There is no known way to go from the hash generated by generate_password_hash to the original string that generated it.
Even if users have the same entered string as password, since the hash generated is never the same even for the same string, hence their is no way to know if 
two users have the same password.

Flask-Login manages the user logged-in state, so that for example users can log in to the application and then navigate to different pages while the application 
"remembers" that the user is logged in. It also provides the "remember me" functionality that allows users to remain logged in even after closing the browser window.

When we log into a website and navigate through the website, the server remembers the logged in state and this is implemented by writing a flag on the user session.
The user session is a private storage that is allocated for each client that connects to the application. 

More specifically, flask_login writes the logged in state of the user to the user session. It does this by writing the id of the user (as a string) to the user session,
when the user then requests a new page, flask_login will read the id of the user from the user session and then it needs to obtain the user object from that id. 
Because flask_login knows nothing about our database, it expects that we provide a function that takes the id and then returns the user object. 
This is called the user_loader function.

login_user :: function that comes with flask_login that will store the user id in the user session.
current_user :: variable that points to the user currently logged in if their is one and if a user is not logged in, it's going to be a proxy user object that 
represents an anonymous user.
logout_user :: function clears the user session

The flask_login can work with any User model class regardless of how it's implemented. To make that work, it requires that a few things be added to our model.
More specifically, it needs 3 ATTRIBUTES AND 1 METHOD to be implemented. To make it easy, the flask_login extension provides a UserMixin class as a base class that
can be added to our model to give an appropriate implementation for the 3 ATTRIBUTES AND 1 METHOD.
-- is_authenticated: a property that is True if the user has valid credentials or False otherwise.
-- is_active: a property that is True if the user's account is active or False otherwise.
-- is_anonymous: a property that is False for regular users, and True for a special, anonymous user.
-- get_id(): a method that returns a unique identifier for the user as a string

Another useful feature of flask login is that it can be used to protect some routes against users who are not logged in.
It does this by redirecting users who are not logged in to the log in page when they try to access a route only accessible by logged in users.
To make this work we need to tell flask what route we use for login users in by the login.login_view = 'function'
The arrangement of the decorators is important. As a rule of thumb, keep the route decorators on top.
Flask_login adds a 'next' parameter to the query string of the URL. This is set to the route that the user wanted to access before being redirected to the log in form.

flask parses a query string and returns a dictionary syntax -- request.args.get

All the urls that flask login and url_for function (by default) sets are relative. since we are in the same website, the browser prepends the domain name and port 
number to the path.
netloc is equivalent to the domain name and port number part of the url.
url_parse() function can be used to parse a url and its from werkzeug.urls

Flask provides a request variable that contains all the information that the client (browser) sent with the request. In particular, the request.args attribute exposes 
the contents of the query string in a friendly dictionary format.

flask_wtf provides an option for custom validators that can be added as a method of the class(form): def validate_<field_name>:

A DYNAMIC PART IN THE URL IS SENT BY FLASK AS AN ARGUMENT WHEN IT INVOKES THE VIEW FUNCTION.

secure hash and message digest algorithms

Reloader, which helps to automatically restart the server any time a change is made to the application, is enabled when DEBUG_MODE is set to 1 or True.

STATUS CODE :: 404 and 500
404 - NOT FOUND
500 - INTERNAL SERVER ERROR raised by flask whenever our application raises an unexpected exception -- an unexpected exception can be raised when we have data in the 
database session that has not been committed yet, in those cases it is a good idea to clean up that session so that the next operation that the server performs
on the database does not have all those changes that were interrupted by the error. The way to do is to do db.session.rollback(), this restarts the database back to
the previous session before it started. 500 error is an indication of a bug in the application.
flask sends the error exception object into the view function defined by the error handler decorator in case we need it to generate the error page.

in flask when we return a response, we can return a status code as a second return value. By default, 200 is the status code returned.

It is good to find a way to be notified whenever a 500 error occurs as they indicate a bug in the application.

Flask uses standard Python logging. If app.logger is accessed before logging is configured, it will add a default handler.
the logging module logs the messages with the chosen severity level and ABOVE.
By default, the logging module logs the messages with a severity level of WARNING and above.
DEBUGGING EMAIL SERVER THAT COMES WITH PYTHON: python -m smtpd -n -c DebuggingServer localhost:8025 -- It doesn't send an email, it just shows the email in the console

The @before_request decorator from Flask register the decorated function to be executed right before the view function.
A server application needs to work in consistent time units, and the standard practice is to use the UTC time zone. Using the local time of the system is not a good 
idea, because then what goes in the database is dependent on your location.

TextAreaField is a multi-line box in which the user can enter text. 
StringField is a single-line box in which the user can enter text.

The RotatingFileHandler class is nice because it rotates the logs, ensuring that the log files do not grow too large when the application runs for a long time.

A many-to-many relationship needs an auxillary (association) table. A self refrential relationship is a relationship in which both sides of the entities linked together
belong to the same table. A relationship in which instances of a class are linked to other instances of the same class is called a self-referential relationship.

Thanks to the SQLAlchemy ORM, we can work with the attribute that establishes the relationship(db.relationship) as if it was a list and that is why it is appropriate 
to define this class variable in the one-side so it can get a list of the items from the many side.
In other words, the relationship object has the append and remove methods.
user1.posts.append(post)
user1.followed.append(user2)

It is always best to move the application logic (follow, unfollow, is_following) away from view functions and into models or other auxiliary classes or modules, 
because that makes unit testing much easier.
The filter() method is similar to the filter_by() method, but lower level, as it can include arbitrary filtering conditions, unlike filter_by() which can only check for
equality to a constant value.

Query TERMINATORS: all(), first(), count().

The join operation lets the database create a temporary table.
Remember that the join query was issued on the Post class, so even though I ended up with a temporary table that was created by the database as part of this query, 
the result will be the posts that are included in this temporary table, without the extra columns added by the join operation.

UNIT TEST: The best way to ensure that code you have already written continues to work in the future is to create a suite of automated tests that you can re-run each 
time changes are made. The unit tests are close to the examples we run in the python session using flask shell, and with the advantage that these are scripted so
they can be re-run at any time in order to assert that our logic is still working smoothly, that is, the newly introduced features don't affect the older ones.
Unittests are grouped in classes that are called Testcases.
In the class, we define the setUp and tearDown methods that execute before and after each unit test defined in the class.
#the remaining methods test features of the User model and they are recognised by the unit testing framework because
#they start with test_, tests run a particular opertaion and check the result if they are the expected ones by using assert____
#there are assert calls to check for different types of conditions.

It is bad practice to let the last request sent by the browser to be a post request because when the browser refreshes, it is going to perform the last request,
that is, submiting the form again. Hence, the standard response for a post request is to return a redirect and that makes the browser issue a GET request, so then a
browser refresh will not re-submit the form.

url_for also accepts additinal arguments that are not part of the URL (that is not for dynmaic parts of the url) and they are going to be added to the query string.

flask_mail is a flask extension dedicated for sending emails.
pyjwt is a python package that implements JSON web tokens and we would use that to generate tokens.
JSON web token specification is a standard that allows application to create secure tokens that cannot be forged.
The key to having strong tokens is to have a secret key that is really secret. If the secret key is leaked, then the person who is in power of that key is also able
to generate tokens that are going to validate.
This plan is to make sure that only valid reset links can be used to reset an account's password. The links are going to be provisioned with a token, and this token 
will be validated before allowing the password change, as proof that the user that requested the email has access to the email address on the account.

The configuration we had set up initially for sending log messages to ourselves ['ADMINS'] in the form of email whenever an error occured in the production server is 
similar to what the flask_mail expects.

There are many extensions that require an application context to be in place to work, because that allows them to find the Flask application instance without it 
being passed as an argument. The reason many extensions need to know the application instance is because they have their configuration stored in the app.config object.

Sending an email synchronously from a web application is not a good idea because that process that in sending an email is not going to be able listen to other clients
during those 2 to 3 sends it's trying to send the email. The standard solution is to move the sending of the email to a background process called THREAD.
Thread is a class that comes with the python standard library.

CSS Framework -- Bootstrap
With the CSS Framework, you will be losing some creative freedom by taking this path, but on the other side, your web pages will look good in all browsers without a lot
of effort. 
A CSS framework provides a collection of high-level general-purpose CSS classes with pre-made styles for common types of USER INTERFACE ELEMENTS. 
Most of these frameworks also provide JavaScript add-ons for things that cannot be done strictly with HTML and CSS.

These are some of the benefits of using Bootstrap to style your web pages:
• Similar look in all major web browsers
• Handling of desktop, tablet and phone screen sizes
• Customizable layouts
• Nicely styled navigation bars, forms, buttons, alerts, popups, etc.

Flask-Bootstrap provides a ready to use base template that has the Bootstrap framework installed.

With the extension initialized, a bootstrap/base.html template becomes available, and can be referenced from application templates with the extends clause.
This template exports a few blocks for derived templates such as title, navbar and content

Flask-Bootstrap comes with a macro (similar to functions in python code) that accepts a Flask-WTF form object as an argument and renders the complete form using 
Bootstrap styles.

Using Python on the server to render dates and times that are presented to users on their web browsers is really not a good idea.

The datetime.now() call returns the correct time for my location, while the datetime.utcnow() call returns the time in the UTC time zone.

The standard solution to avoid time inconsistencies due to local times is to always use the same time zone regardless of the local time in the location where the 
server is running and python provides that time with utcnow(). It solves the problem of time inconsistencies in the server.
It is pretty clear that the server must manage times that are consistent and independent of location. If this application grows to the point of needing several 
production servers in different regions around the world, I would not want each server to write timestamps to the database in different timezones, because that would
make working with these times impossible. Since UTC is the most used uniform timezone and is supported in the datetime class, that is what I'm going to use.

The utcnow() times comes with it's problem in the sense that when we display these times in the web browsers, it is not going to be the users local time.
So we need to convert this utcnow timezones to the users local time when they need to be displayed on a web page.

While standardizing the timestamps to UTC makes a lot of sense from the server's perspective, this creates a usability problem for users as utc timestamps will be 
different from the user's local time.

There are two options to convert utc times to users local time:
-Ask the users to specify their timezone.
-Take advantage of the fact that the web browser knows the user's timezone, and exposes it through the standard date and time JavaScript APIs.
There are actually two ways to take advantage of the timezone information available via JavaScript:
• The "old school" approach would be to have the web browser somehow send the timezone information to the server when the user first logs on to the application. 
This could be done with an Ajax call, or much more simply with a meta refresh tag. Once the server knows the timezone it can keep it in the user's session or write it 
to the user's entry in the database, and from then on adjust all timestamps with it as the time templates are rendered.
• The "new school" approach would be to not change a thing in the server, and let the conversion from UTC to local timezone happen in the client, using JavaScript.
Both options are valid, but the second one has a big advantage. Knowing the timezone of the user isn't always enough to present dates and times in the format expected 
by the user. The browser also has access to the system's locale configuration, which specifies things like AM/PM vs. 24 hour clock, DD/MM/YYYY vs. MM/DD/YYYY and many 
other cultural or regional styles. And if that isn't enough, there is yet one more advantage for the new school approach. There is an opensource library that does all 
this work!

Moment.js is a small open-source JavaScript library that takes date and time rendering to another level. That is, time conversion in the client.
Unlike other extensions, Flask-Moment works together with moment.js, so all templates of the application must include this library.
This can be done in two ways. The most direct way is to explicitly add a <script> tag that imports the library, but Flask-Moment makes it easier, by exposing a 
moment.include_moment() function that generates the <script> tag that imports all the Javascript into the page.

If you define a block in your template without using super(), then any content defined for this block in the base template will be lost.
Moment.js makes a moment class available to the browser. The first step to render a timestamp is to create an object of this class, passing the desired timestamp in 
ISO 8601 format. The moment object (created by passing the desired timestamp in ISO 8601 format) provides several methods for different rendering options.
The ISO 8601 standard format for dates and times is as follows:
{{ year }}-{{ month }}-{{ day }}T{{ hour }}:{{ minute }}:{{ second }}{{ timezone }}. I already decided that I was only going to work with UTC timezones, 
so the last part ({{ timezone }}) is always going to be Z, which represents UTC in the ISO 8601 standard.

If you were working directly in JavaScript, the method calls on the moment object return a string that has the rendered timestamp.
Then it is up to you to insert this text in the proper place on the page, which unfortunately requires some JavaScript to work with the DOM. 
The Flask-Moment extension greatly simplifies the use of moment.js by enabling a moment object similar to the JavaScript one in your templates, 
incorporating the required JavaScript magic to make the rendered times appear on the page.

Flask-Moment uses a syntax that is similar to that of the JavaScript library, with one difference being that the argument to moment() is now a Python datetime object 
and not an ISO 8601 string. The moment() call issued from a template also automatically generates the required JavaScript code to insert the rendered timestamp in the 
proper place of the DOM.

An attribute of flask's request object called accept_languages provides a high-level interface to work with Accept-Language header that clients send with a request.
This header specifies the client language and locale preferences as a weighted list. The contents of this header can be configured in the browser's preferences page, 
with the default being usually imported from the language settings in the computer's operating system.
To select the best language, you need to compare the list of languages requested by the client against the languages the application supports, and using the client 
provided weights, find the best language.

Network shows all the requests that the browser sends. The top request is the main one that went to our application.
In the accept-languages, the first one which doesn't have a q argument has a weight of 1.0.

@babel.localselector decorator tells flask babel to invoke the decorated function for every request in order to choose a language for that request.

flask_babel uses the old style replacement strings with % -- called conversion specifiers. 
_ is a function that wraps a text to be translated as an argument and for the dynamic parts of the text, it takes a keyword argument.

The normal workflow when making an application available in multiple languages is to mark all the texts that need translations in the source code. 
After the texts are marked, Flask-Babel will scan all the files and extract those texts into a separate translation file using the gettext tool.
Some string literals are assigned outside of a request, usually when the application is starting up, so at the time these texts are evaluated there is no way to know 
what language to use. An example of this is the labels associated with form fields. The only solution to handle those texts is to find a way to delay the evaluation of
the string until it is used, which is going to be under an actual request. Flask-Babel provides a lazy evaluation version of _() that is called lazy_gettext()

set deirective in jinja ensures that everything that is defined from set to endset is assigned to the variable in {% set user_link %}, so the variable is user_link
in the case. The set and endset template directives can be used to create an intermediate variable.

After the texts that need to be translated have been marked, then we extract all those texts to a separate file (.pot file which stands for portable object template).
For that we are going to use the pybabel extraction command and this command needs to be first configured so that it knows what files to search for text to translate.
The configuration is done by writing a babel.cfg file.
The third line of the babel.cfg file defines two extensions provided by the Jinja2 template engine that help Flask-Babel properly parse template the files.
The .pot format comes from the gettext translation utilities. 
pybabel extract -F babel.cfg -k _l -o messages.pot .
Note that the messages.pot file is not a file that needs to be incorporated into the project. This is a file that can be easily regenerated any time it is needed, simply by running the command above again. So there is no need to commit this file to source control.

WORKFLOW FOR TRANSLATION:
- Mark the texts to be translated.
- Extract the texts into a .pot file. This file is only needed to generate the language catalog that will be referenced by the application.
- Using the .pot file containing all the texts to be translated, generate a language catalog (.po file) for each specific language the application will allow so that each language gets its own repository.
- The messages.po file that was created in each language repository uses a format that is the de facto standard for language translations; the format used by the gettext utility. Therefore, it can be given to a Translator to work on. 
- The messages.po file is a sort of source file for translations. When you want to start using these translated texts, this file needs to be compiled into a format thatis efficient to be used by the application at run-time. To compile all the translations for the application, you can use the pybabel compile command.
There are many translation applications that work with .po files. If you feel comfortable editing the text file, then that's sufficient, but if you are working with a large project it may be recommended to work with a specialized editor. The most popular translation application is the open-source poedit, which is available for all
major operating systems. If you are familiar with vim, then the po.vim plugin gives some key mappings that make working with these files easier.

If you prefer not to change your browser settings, the other alternative is to force a language by making the localeselector function always return it (as a string).
moment.js provides support for different languages. The library supports localization and internationalization, so all that needs to be done is configure the proper language. Flask-Babel returns the selected language and locale for a given request through the get_locale function.
- current_app - (Application context) :: The application instance for the active application.
- g - (Application context) :: An object that the application can use for temporary storage during the handling of a request. This variable is reset with each request.   
- request Request context The request object, which encapsulates the contents of anHTTP request sent by the client.
- session (Request context) :: The user session, a dictionary that the application can use to store values that are ¿remembered¿ between requests.

AJAX requires some logic to be implemented on the client side in Javascript.
Usually, the browser sends a request to the server and the server sends a response (an HTML document), then the browser replaces the current page with the new one. It means that the server does all the work while the client (a web browser commanded by a user) just displays the pages and accepts user input.
In high level terms, AJAX means that the browser is sending a special type of request called aysnchronous (or Ajax) request, the response from this request is going to be sent to a Javascript function and the function can take the data that came in the response and dynamically render it in the existing page. 

There is a different model in which the client takes a more active role. In this model, the client issues a request to the server and the server responds with a web page, but unlike the previous case, not all the page data is HTML, there is also sections of the page with code, typically written in Javascript. Once the client receives the page it displays the HTML portions, and executes the code. From then on you have an active client that can do work on its own without little or no contact with the server. In a strict client-side application the entire application is downloaded to the client with the initial page request, and then the application runs entirely on the client, only contacting the server to retrieve or store data and making dynamic changes to the appearance of that first and only web page. This type of applications are called Single Page Applications or SPAs.

AJAX is a technique, whereby the browser inserts data into a current page dynamically without refreshing the page. It is short for Asynchronous Javascript and XML (these days XML is often replaced with JSON).

AZURE is Microsoft's Cloud service.
As always with configuration values, I prefer to install them in environment variables and import them into the Flask configuration from there. This is particularly important with sensitive information such as keys or: passwords that enable access to third-party services. You definitely do not want to write those explicitly in the code.
The Microsoft Translator API is a web service that accepts HTTP requests. There are a few HTTP clients in Python, but the most popular and simple to use is the requests package.
An asynchronous (or Ajax) request is similar to the routes and view functions that I have created in the application, with the only difference that instead of returning HTML or a redirect, it just returns data, formatted as XML or more commonly JSON.

The request.form attribute is a dictionary that Flask exposes with all the data that has included in the submission.
When working with JavaScript in the browser, the page currently being displayed is internally represented in as the Document Object Model or just the DOM. This is a hierarchical structure thatreferences all the elements that exist in the page. The JavaScript code running in this context can make changes to the DOM to trigger changes in the page.

jsonify from the flask package, takes a python data structure and converts it to JSON.
In Javascript, most things happen asynchronously

Vagrant defines virtual servers using a vagrantfile.

SQLAlchemy provides a large list of events that applications can be notified about. It attaches a function to a SQLAlchemy event.
A fairly standard approach for web-based searches is to have the search term as a q argument in the query string of the URL.
Allowing searches to be completely encapsulated in a URL is nice, because these can be shared with other people, who just by clicking on the link haveaccess to the search results.

The formdata argument determines from where Flask-WTF gets form submissions.
The default is to use request.form, which is where Flask puts form values that are submitted via POST request. 
Forms that are submitted via GET request have the field values in the query string, so I need to point Flask-WTF at request.args, which is where Flaskwrites the query string arguments.

SSH stands for Secure Shell which allows access to a computer remotely or a headless server.
Root is basically Administrator and allows to access and install software.
HAVING ROOT ENABLED OVER SSH IS DANGEROUS!!!!

A firewall is a software that blocks accesses to the server on any port that are not explicitly enabled.
